So, some people have the misconception
that you need to have a flat back if you
want to maximize pecs and be completely
flat. Shoulders don't move that way.
There's a few things here that I want to
happen. So, when I lower that weight
down to my chest, I do need not maximal
retraction, but I still need some
retraction of the scapula. The next
thing we need to consider is the way
that muscles work. When we want to
maximize the development of them, let's
talk about the pec muscle particularly.
We got to think of every muscle has an
origin and insertion and their job is to
pull those two points together. That's
how we create those joint actions. Okay,
that's where we maximize the
contraction. Now the origin of a pec is
we have abdominal fibers, sternal
portion and clavvicular portion. That's
the origin. The insertion is on the
outer lip of the bicipital groove. So
out on the out on the humorous in front
here. Now when that muscle contracts the
action that it creates is flexion,
horizontal adduction, internal rotation.
And if we didn't have opposing muscles,
dislocation of the humorris, that's the
action of a pec. That's the fully
contracted position. Remember the best
way to maximize the development of a
muscles to go from full stretch to full
contraction. Fully lengthened position.
So how do we get the fully lengthened
position? I take that origin as far away
from the insertion as possible. So, how
do I take the insertion away? One,
retract the scapula. Two, think about
it. How do you stretch your pec? Do I
stretch my pec back here? Or what do I
do with my arm? Or do I stretch my pec
out here? So, this is called flared
elbows. This is how you stretch your
pecs, isn't it? No one stretches their
pecs here. There's not really much
tension on my pec. There's tension on my
pec here where my elbows are flared to
90°. Okay. So, shoulder back, abduct the
humorris, that's on my insertion. What
about the origin? Extend the thoracic
spine. So these are the ways that I can
increase tension on that muscle. Sternum
angle up, chest up. What's the action
that's happening in my thoracic spine
here? Thoracic extension is required to
maximize the tension on the muscle that
you are trying to target. So when people
say stop arching, you don't need arch
for it. It's like you're actually
objectively wrong. I want to create as
much tension on there and those are the
mechanisms of it. Take the origin away
from the insertion. That's max length of
that muscle. What are the
contraindications of this though? So
this is what position of the elbow.
What's this called? That's associated
with bad technique in a bench press.
Flared elbows. You hear people say don't
flare your elbows because you are
creating potential risk of injury on the
shoulder. So what's the mechanism of
that? Well, I'll explain. Abduction of
the humorris decreases the space between
the head of the humorris and the
acchromian. So that's this bone here,
which is the top of the scapula here.
That's the acchromian. Now at the top of
the scapula, there's a muscle that sits
on top of that part of the scapula
called the suppinatus. The suppinatus
passes under the acchromian and attaches
to the top of the humorris. And when I
abduct that humorris to 90 degrees, it
closes that space and can impinge on
that tendon. This is where the bone is
rubbing against that tendon and
eventually can fray away at that tendon.
Okay? Now, this doesn't happen to
everybody because with most people, we
have a thing called scapulmeral rhythm.
And this abduction of the humorris is
paired with upward rotation of the
scapula to hold the golf tea under that
golf ball. Do we see that? So as I'm
moving the humorus, the scapula is also
moving. So that space stays open for
most people that don't have
dysfunctional shoulders. So what causes
the dysfunction on the shoulder? It
could be tightness in these upper traps,
weakness in these lower traps, which is
a very common thing that stop the
scapula from rotating to where it needs
to to be able to position the humorus
where you want it to go. So, this is
where when people say things like,
"Don't flare your elbows in a bench
press because it's dangerous." Yeah. If
you have that type of shoulder where
it's not completely functional, where
abducting the humorous to 90° closes
that space entirely and is rubbing on
that suppinatus tendon. That's not all
of us. Some of us it might be. And if
that's you, that's the mechanism. For a
lot of us, you can bench press safely
with your elbows fled. So, why don't we
all just bench press safely with our
elbows fled? Can't load it as much. Why
can't I load that as much? Now, let's
talk about length tension relationship
of a muscle. Okay, understanding the
strongest contractile length of a muscle
is important here. Let's break it up
into three components. Fully shortened,
mid-range, fully lengthened. Which range
of motion is the strongest contractile
position? Mid-range is the strongest.
What's the weakest? fully lengthened is
the weakest. Where do we tear pecs on a
bench press? Fully lengthened when the
bar is where? On the chest. And usually
when the elbows are flared. So to reduce
tension in that position, what do I do
with my elbows? Tuck them. Now, here's
the thing. What has a greater risk of
injury? 1 RM or 10RM? 1 RM. What do we
do in powerlifting? 1 RM. What do we do
in bodybuilding? 1 RM 2 3 4. The
bodybuilders aren't doing those rep
ranges. That's where we increase the
risk of injury. So therefore, when we're
targeting the muscle in the weakest
position, what loads should we be using?
Moderate loads that have a lower risk of
injuring. You ain't tearing muscles on
your 10RM loads. So, a lot of the times
people say, "Oh, don't flare it cuz
you're going to tear your pegs." Like,
if you're doing a 1 RM, that's where you
see I'll tell you when bodybuilders do
it when they do their sets of 10. And
then Larry Wills comes along and goes,
"Let's just go 220." And then puts an
extra plate on and then things go pop
because you've done 10 in the safe way
for that 10 rep range. Now you're doing
ones positioning the elbows flared
targeting the muscle in the fully
lengthened position. That's not how you
want to shift the heaviest loads. Okay.
So the question was should we still
extend the thoracic spine even if the
objective is bodybuilding or if we're
doing a flat foot. Yeah. If I want to
stimulate pec growth. Yeah. I want to
increase tension on that pec by picking
the chest up. So taking the origin away
from the insertion. Chest up and
shoulder back. That's maximal stretch.
And then contract. Don't just lay flat
with your shoulders rounded because
someone on the internet said that's
cheating. You should not.